---
created: 2022-11-10T15:49:09-06:00
modified: 2022-11-10T15:49:25-06:00
---

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): Morning analysis: The GOP is probably going to end up with between 218 and 220 seats in the House. This means only a 1, 3, or 5 seat advantage. Kevin McCarthy is likely going to be challenged for the speaker's seat, probably by Scalise (who runs even further right) 1/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): Whoever the speaker is, they're going to have a pretty unmanageable situation. The right wing of the House GOP is detached from reality, intransigent, incapable of compromise, will make insane demands, and is large enough to derail EVERYTHING. 2/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): There will be crazies in key positions on all the plum committees. Wall to wall nutso hearings on Fauci putting 5G in vaccines and other nonsense, actual legislation won't happen. Which is a problem. Because you still have to pass budgets and raise the debt ceiling. 3/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): So, whoever is speaker is going to face a dilemma:

a. Cut deals with Democrats to get critical bills through

b. Go with the crazy and accept government shut downs  or potential destruction of the US economy via debt default 4/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): I am assured by former Republicans that both Scalise and McCarthy will choose b, because none of them wants to be labeled a RINO, and for 90% of Republicans the only election that matters is the primary (due mostly to gerrymandering and the rural/urban divide). 5/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): Given how the crazies ran off both Boehner and Paul Ryan, and now MTG, Gosar, and Biggs will hold veto power over everything, the Speaker will more or less hand over the agenda to them rather than stand up to the whackdoodles because it's the path of least resistance. 6/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): If the GOP Speaker does stand up to them, Trump, Fox News, Newsmax, and everyone else will happily give platforms to Trump, DeSantis, MTG, and everyone else wanting to establish themselves as a "real conservative". 7/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): But wait, it gets even more unstable... On average, in any given Congress about 3 members die. Others retire for whatever reason (such as getting caught with a sex worker), or go to the pokey for white collar crime. All of which result in special elections. 8/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): Given the age, hypocrisy, and lack of real morals on the part of Republican politicians, they're disproportionately likely to be the ones who leave office and cause a special election. Which means control of the House may be up for a vote several times in the next two years. 9/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): This will cause even more chaos and stress for the speaker. Government shut downs, debt default, and hearings that look crazy to average people but feed red meat to the base aren't popular with the public. However, the Speaker can't hold things together without them. 10/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): With a (probably) split house and Senate, the Biden agenda is dead. However, the House is going to propose a lot of legislation that's going nowhere. For the most part, GOP policies aren't particularly popular. So, the whole thing is going to be a Kabuki dance for the base. 11/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): However, most of the public really doesn't care about policy or bills that get introduced: they are more interested in the optics. Threats of government shuts downs and destroying the American economy to meet the (nutso, unpopular) demands of MTG are a GOP nightmare. 12/n

Brynn Tannehill (@BrynnTannehill): Buckle up kids. The next two years are going to be highly unpredictable, chaotic, illogical, and radical as the House goes far to the right in order to keep the crazies placated, and the government gets shut down for long periods. 13/n
