---
created: 2022-11-18T11:46:58-06:00
modified: 2022-11-18T11:47:10-06:00
---

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 1. Speaking of things collapsing, I have a few thoughts on Sam Bankman-Fried, right-wing populism, 1990s nostalgia, Kirsten Gillibrand, Eric Adams, Matt Yglesias and the socialism of fools. (This one is for the fans).

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 2. It's hardly surprising that the collapse of FTX, along with fact that the now disgraced Sam Bankman-Fried was second biggest funder of Dems in 2022, is causing the far right to salivate: look (((they))) control Biden. But Yglesias offers his own version of this. https://twitter.com/HeerJeet/status/1593641790191505409/photo/1

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 3. Yglesias: "Any political success is a highly collective endeavor and no one person is responsible for any result. But money does matter in politics... It’s plausible that without SBF’s money, Trump would still be in the White House." This is absurd.

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 4. Money matters in politics, but it's not always decisive. SBF spent at least $11 million in primary to defeat progressive Andrea Salinas, who won. That's even more true on national scale. 2020 national election was $14 billion overall, so SBF's tens of millions dwarfed.

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 5. So why, after SBF has been utterly disgraced as a ponzi con artist, is Yglesias telling us to be grateful to SBF ("without SBF’s money, Trump would still be in the White House")

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 6. As Yglesias admits, he & SBF share a worldview (in MY's words "agree on a lot of important issues"). In his May apologia for SBF, Yglesias links his approval of SBF with a familiar hitting his familiar theme of popularism (i.e. Dems moderating & technocratic restoration) https://twitter.com/HeerJeet/status/1593644917754052612/photo/1

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 7. One way to understand popularism is not as an ideology but as a gestalt. It's 1990s nostalgia: an attempt to return to era when left was weaker & Clintonian dems exalted tech & technocracy. This photo of Clinton, Blair & SBF is revealing. https://twitter.com/HeerJeet/status/1593645542344531968/photo/1

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 8. The dream SBF was able to sell to the Yglesias/Shor types is a dream of 1990s restoration: lets go back to world before Occupy Wall Street, BLM, Me Too. A world where tech lords & moderate Dem pols come up with technocratic solutions, no messy left activism.

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 9. The politics of crypto/bitcoin is worth attending to. The early adapters were the far right, figures like Bannon & Rand who glommed on to the anti-system appeal. If it had stayed that way, Dems could have had an easy victory showing these people off as fools.

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 10. But instead of leaving the crypto/bitcoin stuff to the right, Dem pols like Sean Patrick Maloney, Kirsten Gillibrand, & Eric Adams got in on the party. In case of Maloney & Gillibrand embracing super light regulations.  https://twitter.com/LeverNews/status/1592177577413615617

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 11. The popularists wants a 1990s restoration & they'll get one: Bill Clinton's embrace of centrism & neoliberal economics created opening for the far right to expand both inside & outside the GOP: it was the groundwork for rise of paleo-cons. Popularism is following same path

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 12. Yglesias likes to adopt the mantle of Weber & talk about the ethics of responsible politics that looks to consequences. Well: what are the consequences of a large swath of centrist elite aligning with a ponzi scheme? It's a gift to the far right.

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 13. Yglesias loved SBF because SBF promised a large source of money to help defeat progressives (as he did with moderate success in 202 Democratic primaries). But what are consequences of this? A Democratic party that can easily be linked to a ponzi scheme.

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 14. My man @lionel_trolling has worked to revive the understanding of modern antisemitism as "the socialism of fools" i.e. the conspiracy adopted by those looking for a scapegoat rather than class analysis. I fear we're seeing this dynamic now

https://johnganz.substack.com/p/the-socialism-of-fools

Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet): 15. I have more thoughts on this in my Nation column. For now I'll say that people who talk about the Weberian politics of responsibility should take some responsibility for the shitstorm they've created.  https://www.thenation.com/article/politics/democrats-crypto-sam-bankman-fried/
