---
created: 2022-11-19T17:09:10-06:00
modified: 2022-11-19T17:09:22-06:00
---

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): Hearing tonight's news out of Twitter reminds of a two-year study Google conducted. It found that high-performing teams have five specific traits:

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): 1. Structure and clarity: Clarity of goals, roles, and execution plans.

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): 2. Meaning of work: The purpose of their work is important to team members.

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): 3. Dependability: Delivering high-quality work on time.

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): 4. Impact of work: Making a positive difference on the lives of others.

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): 5. Psychological safety: The willingness to take risks without feeling insecure or embarrassed.

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): "New" Twitter appears to have none of these, nor a real desire to create a culture in which those characteristics would flourish.

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): When the autopsy is done, and every reputable business journal is watching now, this will be why it died.

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): The world's most renowned, profitable and growing brands know their biggest bet much be Human Capital. Who's willing to do the work and why? Can they bring their full selves to the job everyday in a way that advances innovation and outsized creativity?

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): Do they feel well-compensated in mission and paycheck? Do they feel seen, recognized and valued by inspired leaders?

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): As of today, the answer to those things is no. Unless there is a monumental sea-change in posture and approach, it is a dead brand walking-- burning cash and careers on its way down.

G O L D I E. (@goldietaylor): If you won't go hard core for your team, you can bet they won't go hard core for you for very long. They'll be rowing with one ore in the water until the next ship comes along.
