# 2014-01-06-Banking_as_an_information_infrastructure_of_relations

## Title:  Banking as an information infrastructure of relations
Date: 2014-01-06  
Content:  

The following excerpt is a concise summary of 'Friedlander, Amy, "In God
We Trust" All Others Pay Cash: Banking as an American Infrastructure
1800-1935, Corporation for National Research Initiatives, Reston, VA,
1996. pp. 97-98'. Perhaps it has some utility in current conversations
about business, relationships, and trust.

"[B]anking meets the first criterion of an infrastructure: it is
ubiquitous. ... Banks do not have physical analogs to rails or
transmission lines. Rather, banking is the sum of a series of
informational transactions, based on shared concepts, procedures, and
relationships that enables commodities and funds to flow within and
among regions. Banking is, therefore, an infrastructure of and about
information --- information in the form of discounts, interest, and
prices, and information (or misinformation) that allowed consumers
(including other bankers and investors) to maker decisions about
spending and saving. The value of money was determined by market
transactions; the integrity of the system, however, was built on
relationships among bankers and between bankers and the public, governed
and mediated by information."

Citation:

Dublin Core RDF:
<rdf:RDF
xmlns:rdf="<http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>"
xmlns:dc="<http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/>">
   <rdf:Description rdf:nodeID="n0">
       <dc:title>"In God we trust" all others pay cash : banking as an
American infrastructure 1800-1935</dc:title>
       <dc:type>book</dc:type>
       <dc:creator>Friedlander, Amy</dc:creator>
       <dc:creator>Corporation for National Research
Initiatives.</dc:creator>
       <dc:publisher>Corp. for National Research
Initiatives</dc:publisher>
       <dc:date>1996</dc:date>
   </rdf:Description>
</rdf:RDF>

=====
